1
Graded
Exposure

 2
When to use this workbook
Graded Exposure is an evidence based intervention for the treatment of anxiety and phobias.
This workbook can be used either alone as a self help resource or with the support of a Psychological
Wellbeing Practitioner.

How to use this workbook.
Graded Exposure has three steps.
It is important to work through one step at a time, only move on to the next step of Graded Exposure
once you are comfortable with using the previous step. It is key to follow all three steps of Graded
Exposure in sequence.
It can take some time for an intervention to become effective and to show improvement. It is
important to allow enough time for the intervention to be effective.

Helpful Resources: https://www.talkplus.org.uk/graded-exposure-video-module

Exposure and Habituation https://talkchanges.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/ExposureHabituation.pdf
Facing Your Fears https://www.anxietycanada.com/strategies-and-techniques/facing-fears/
Anxiety UK https://www.anxietyuk.org.uk/

Evidence Base for Graded Exposure:
NHS Phobias https://www.nhs.uk/mental-health/conditions/phobias/treatment/
NHS Agoraphobia https://www.nhs.uk/mental-health/conditions/agoraphobia/treatment/
NICE Guidance https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg123/chapter/1-Guidance#steps-2-and-3treatment-and-referral-for-treatment

Graded Exposure

 3
Jo's Story
Jo is 32, and has struggled with a fear of driving that has developed in the last few months following a
period of not driving the car.
They said "I never used to be scared of driving, I used to drive everywhere, an hour to work, in the
countryside and on motorways! But now even the thought of getting in a car makes my heart race. I
feel sweaty, shaky and even get light headed. It is having a huge impact on my life."
Jo began avoiding driving completely, they opted to work from home, asked friends to pick them up
and wouldn't go anywhere that involved driving. This meant that Jo even became fearful of being a
passenger in someone else's car.
Jo knew that this couldn't carry on, so Jo googled "ways to overcome driving phobia" and found out
about graded exposure. When looking on the NHS website, Jo saw that graded exposure could be done
in a type of therapy called CBT. Jo looked at their local area and found TalkPlus provided this.
"When I referred to TalkPlus, I really wanted a quick fix but soon learnt that graded exposure, was going to take hard work and lots of practice."
Jo worked with a psychological wellbeing-practitioner in 30 minute sessions of guided self-help on driving phobia. They used the vicious cycle to work out what was maintaining Jo's problem. It seemed that
because Jo was avoiding, they were never allowing the anxiety to lessen therefore each time they got in
a car they felt just as scared as before.
Jo set goals for treatment to be able to drive to and from work, twice a week and began with step one of
graded exposure by identifying "anxiety provoking situations", after this they were able to rank them in
a hierarchy from least feared to most feared.
They could then begin planning their first exposure, keeping in mind the four conditions to successfully
complete graded exposure. They found the first activities fairly straight forward and noticed the anxiety
began to drop as they stayed in the anxiety provoking situation.
However, Jo decided to skip some activities on the ladder and jump to a more feared activity without
repeating previous exposures. Jo found this flooded them with fight or flight anxiety symptoms which
knocked their confidence. Despite this Jo returned to the less feared activities, and continued to repeat them in a graded manner without distraction making them prolonged enough to habituate.
Jo completed all 6 sessions of graded exposure and now feels comfortable driving to and from work
again.
"Using graded exposure, I was able to get my independence back! Although I still have some anxiety
around driving, I know that I can continue to use graded exposure to make myself feel more comfortable and achieve my goals."

You can find Jo's example sheets before each
blank template

 4

The CBT or vicious cycle below gives an example of some worries and how this can be maintained.
What is anxiety?
We can feel anxiety in different ways, it can be an emotion, or we can experience feelings of anxiety
in our bodies. This is the fight/fight/freeze reflex which serves to protect us when we are threatened
with dangerous situations. Adrenaline is pumped into our body to help prepare us and blood is
directed to the large muscle groups ready to fight or run away.
This can cause symptoms like the physical ones listed below.
The Vicious Cycle of Anxiety and Avoidance

How does avoidance affect Anxiety?
When we fear certain situations, objects or activities, we either avoid or leave the situation or use
safety behaviours in order to reduce our anxiety.
Although this may be helpful in reducing our distress in the short term, avoidance can help to
maintain this pattern of fear and anxiety as shown above. Therefore each time we go into a feared
situation we experience the same high level of anxiety
time after time, by experiencing physical symptoms and
the anxious emotions as well as unhelpful thoughts
around the situation.
What is Graded Exposure?
Avoid anxiety provoking
situation or things
Use safety behaviour to
cope with anxiety
Heart pounding
Sweaty palms
Feeling sick
Tunnel vision
Restlessness
Anxious
Panicked
Scared
Upset

'I won't be able to cope'
'Something bad might
happen'
'need to get out of here'

 5

Write down anxious thoughts that you have experienced recently in the box and then see how that made you feel emotionally, how it
changed what you did or didn't do (your behaviour) and also what you felt in your body like anxiety symptoms.
What does your vicious cycle look like?

 6

Why set goals?
Goal setting is an evidence based way of helping ourselves to decide on things you would like to
achieve and what you will do to get there as well as work toward them.
This helps us to stay focused on achieving things that matter most to us.

Goals should be:
 Focused on short term objectives to begin with
 Limited to no more than 3 goals
 Positive in nature

You can use SMART to help you consider your goals:

Specific Try and be specific with a time, date or anything you'll need to
achieve the goal
Measurable Goals should be able to be measured on a scale
Achievable Goals should not 'set you up to fail' and should be feel within
reach
Relevant Goals should be relevant to your life or current
problem
Time specific Set a specific time or deadline to achieve your goal
Setting Goals

 7

Have a go at creating your own goals and rating how much you have achieved
your goal so far:

0 2 4 6 8 10
= Not
achieved this
goal at all
= slightly
achieved this
goal
= somewhat
achieved this
goal
= markedly
achieved this
goal
= mostly
achieved this
goal
= completely
achieved this
goal
Setting Goals

Goal 1
Write your goal here:

Goal rating:
 /10

Goal 2
Write your goal here:

Goal rating:
 /10

Goal 3
Write your goal here:

Goal rating:
 /10

 8
Tackling Avoidance in Feared Situations
Graded Exposure is an evidence based treatment used to tackle avoidance of feared situations,
activities or objects due to anxiety. It works through a process called habituation, a gradual
reduction in the physical sensations of anxiety. This is achieved through identifying feared
situations or objects and gradually exposing ourselves to them whilst following four conditions.
Habituation
As shown in the left graph, when we leave a situation our anxiety immediately reduces,
however the next time we enter that situation our anxiety becomes just as high. As in the past we
have found relief in leaving, this is what we often continue to do to reduce the distress we
experience.
The anxiety we experience is part of the 'fight or flight' response, a biological system to prepare us to
respond to frightening or dangerous situations. However physiologically we cannot remain at this
high level of anxiety, so by exposing ourselves to the situation, and remaining in it, our anxiety
naturally reduces, this is the process of habituation.
Graded exposure works by gradually exposing ourselves to the feared situation, beginning only with
situations that we feel we are able to tolerate, this can be seen in the graph on the right. This allows
the process of habituation to occur in order to reduce our
fear and reduce our anxiety response in the long term.
Graded Exposure

 9
Identifying anxiety-provoking situations

The first step of Graded Exposure is to identify all the activities that cause you anxiety so that you are
either avoiding them, leaving them or distracting yourself to try and cope. It may be that you have a
number of different feared situations, objects or activities, it is then important to separate these fears
into different lists and select one specific fear to tackle at a time.

• Avoiding or leaving a situation are just two things we might do to make ourselves feel safer and to
reduce our anxiety.
• There are often more subtle ways in which we avoid fully experiencing anxiety in situations.
These include distraction and safety behaviours, see the box on the next page below for
examples, to help identify the subtle behaviours we use to minimise distress.
• Engaging in distraction and safety behaviours also maintains our fear of the situation in the long
term, much as avoiding or leaving it does. Therefore it is important to include these in our list, for
example going shopping with a friend instead of alone so we feel safer and experience less
anxiety.

Be specific
Whilst making the list of anxiety provoking situations, including when we distract ourselves, it is
important to be specific.
Include in the list what, where, when and with whom each situation occurs.
It may be that there are a number of similar situations that cause anxiety, for example going
shopping with a friend at 8am or going shopping with a friend at 4pm, due to the fact that these
small differences cause different levels of anxiety.

Step One

 10
Identifying safety behaviours

To complete Step 1 use Worksheet 1 on page 12.
Fill in the worksheet with activities that provoke your
anxiety.
Step One (continued)

Listening to Music Taking a friend or family member or partner
Wearing head/ear phones Carrying a bottle of water
Talking on the phone Staying near an exit
Drinking Alcohol Sitting/Staying next to someone you know
Planning your route before hand Overplanning before events
Carrying Anxiety medication Having to do certain routines or follow plans
 Common distraction techniques and safety behaviours

Try writing some of the safety behaviours you do below:

 11
Anxiety-Provoking Situations
• Sitting in the car
• Driving anywhere round the local area
• Parking the car in a public carpark
• Driving to unknow places or new towns
• Being in a situation where I could have a car crash
• Sitting in someone else's car
• Driving with someone else in case I crash
• Driving down windy country lanes
• Driving on the motorway because it's fast
• Someone driving close behind me
Be Specific: What? When? Where? Who?
JO'S EXAMPLE: WORKSHEET ONE

 12
Anxiety-Provoking Situations
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Be Specific: What? When? Where? Who?
WORKSHEET ONE: Identifying anxiety-
provoking situations

 13
Developing a hierarchy

Having identified a specific fear to work on, the second step of Graded Exposure is to rank the
situations identified in Worksheet 1 in order of the level of anxiety you experience. Ranking
activities from least anxiety-provoking, to most anxiety-provoking means that Graded Exposure can
be carried out gradually, without experiencing levels of anxiety that are overwhelming.

Activities are ranked from those that would provoke the highest level of anxiety to those that provoke
the least intense anxiety. It is useful to think about the situation that would be easiest to remain in
first and the situation that would be the most difficult, and then fill in situations in between. This
process can seem very daunting or overwhelming at first therefore this stage of developing a
hierarchy is very important. Sometimes it can be difficult to think of what would be more or less
anxiety-provoking, therefore it is useful to;

Rate predicted anxiety levels
It can be helpful to mark on Worksheet 1 next to each situation how much anxiety it would provoke
from 0-100%. This will then make it easier to place the situations or activities in a hierarchy, from the
lowest to the highest percentage.

Step Two

 14

Break it down
Sometimes it is difficult to come up with several different variations of the same situation, especially
as the feelings it causes are so overwhelming. By thinking of what, where, when and with whom each
situation occurs we can then break down the situations into many variations that cause different
levels of anxiety. The box below gives some examples of this, also see example sheets at the back.
To complete Step 2 use Worksheet 2 on page 16.
Rank the activities in order of how much anxiety they
provoke.

• Different times of the day
• With safety behaviours and without
• Looking at a photograph

• Watching a video
• Larger or smaller locations
• Alone or with a friend
 Breaking down your fears
Step Two (continued)
 When What
Where Who

 15
JO'S EXAMPLE: WORKSHEET TWO
Most anxiety-provoking % Rating
Drive on the motorway at rush hour 100%
Drive on the motorway in light traffic 90%
Drive on the dual carriage way 80%
Drive on a country road 70%
Drive to a new place in heavier traffic 60%
Drive to a new place in light traffic 50%
Drive around the local neighbourhood for 30 mins 40%
Drive to around the local neighbour hood for 15 30%
Pull out of the driveway and drive a lap of the road 20%
Sit in the car with the ignition on 10%
Least anxiety-provoking

 16
WORKSHEET TWO: Developing a hierarchy

Most anxiety-provoking % Rating

Least anxiety-provoking

 17
Planning exposures
The third step of Graded Exposure is to begin exposing yourself to feared situations, starting with
the least anxiety -provoking activity. When planning exposures it is important to make a specific
plan to carry them out based on the four conditions of Graded Exposure. These conditions are
Graded, Prolonged, Without Distraction and Repeated.

1. Graded
Facing fears can be a very difficult and overwhelming challenge,
therefore it is important to start by exposing yourself to a situation
which causes some level of anxiety but is not too much. This is
achieved by using the hierarchy developed in Step 2. In this way you
can move up the hierarchy only when you feel confident enough to do
so.

2. Prolonged
It is important that we remain in the feared situation for long
enough until anxiety naturally reduces through the process of
habituation. This process can take anywhere from 5 minutes to
2 hours. It can be difficult to stay in the situation for this length
of time, however if you leave before beginning to feel a
reduction in anxiety you will continue to avoid the situations,
and use this unhelpful strategy in the future.

Step Three

 18

3. Without Distraction
Engaging in safety behaviours or distraction whilst in an
anxiety-provoking situation means we do not fully
experience the symptoms of anxiety. Habituation cannot
occur if we are reducing our anxiety in other ways,
therefore it is important to plan your exposure to ensure
you are not distracted in any way. It may be that to start
with it is too anxiety -provoking not to use any safety
behaviours that you might have been using for a long time.
In this case you can begin exposing yourself with these
behaviours, and then gradually reducing them.

4. Repeated
In order for habituation to occur in a specific situation
we need to repeatedly expose ourselves. It is
recommended that an exposure to one situation is
repeated 4-5 times in one week. This may be difficult
to achieve if the situations you are exposing yourself to
are expensive, rare or involve others. In these cases it
is important to be creative, e.g. watch a video, and try
to carry out as many exposures as possible.

To complete Step 3 use Worksheet 3 on page 20.
When planning exposure in the diary be specific about what, where, when and with whom you will carry out the exposure.
Rate your level of anxiety, from 0 -100% before, during and after each
exposure to monitor reductions in your anxiety levels. There is a
space to make any comments or record any reactions during each
repeated exposure.

Step Three (continued)

 19
 Date &
Time
Duration Exposure Anxiety Rating Comments
Before During After
1 Saturday
2pm
30 minutes Driving round the local neighbourhood 60% 75% 40% It was hard to get back to
driving locally, but after I felt
quite good about myself
2 Sunday
9.15am
25 minutes Drive round the local neighbourhood 55% 65% 80% I felt very anxious during this
drive and I felt vey nervous I
might have a crash
3 Tuesday
4.15pm
40 minutes Drive round the local neighbourhood 50% 55% 40% I was still nervous from
Sunday's drive but it went
better than expected
4 Wednesday
3pm
55 minutes Drive to new town 55% 50% 30% I'm was very scared about
driving somewhere unknown
but it went quite well
5 Friday
12.30pm
60 minutes Drive to another new town 40% 30% 15% Found it really easy after
yesterdays drive, even drove
a bit longer than before
 0% 25% 50% 75% 100%
No Anxiety Mild Anxiety Moderate Anxiety Severe Anxiety Panic
JO'S EXAMPLE: WORKSHEET THREE

 20
 Date &
Time
Duration Exposure Anxiety Rating Comments
Before During After
1
2
3
4
5
 0% 25% 50% 75% 100%
No Anxiety Mild Anxiety Moderate Anxiety Severe Anxiety Panic
WORKSHEET THREE: Planning Exposure

 21

What techniques have been most helpful?
What are my early warning signs?
Are there any future obstacles coming up?

How can I prepare for these?

What are my future goals?
(see next page for a goal sheet)
Maintaining Progress

 22

Have a go at creating your own goals to continue your progress and rate how
much you have achieved your goal so far:

0 2 4 6 8 10
= Not
achieved this
goal at all
= slightly
achieved this
goal
= somewhat
achieved this
goal
= markedly
achieved this
goal
= mostly
achieved this
goal
= completely
achieved this
goal
Setting Future Goals

Goal 1
Write your goal here:

Goal rating:
 /10

Goal 2
Write your goal here:

Goal rating:
 /10

Goal 3
Write your goal here:

Goal rating:
 /10

 23
Booklet created: August 2023
Review due: August 2024